README.md, before:

UNVMe - A User Space NVMe Driver
================================

UNVMe is a user space NVMe driver developed at Micron Technology.

The UNVMe source code, under the src directory, contains four independent modules:

    VFIO    -   VFIO supported device and I/O memory wrapper functions
                (unvme_vfio.h unvme_vfio.c)

    NVMe    -   NVMe supported functions
                (unvme_nvme.h unvme_nvme.c)

    Log     -   Simple logging supported functions
                (unvme_log.h unvme_log.c)

    UNVMe   -   User Space driver interface built on top of the other three modules
                (unvme.h unvme.c unvme_core.h unvme_core.c)


The test/nvme directory contains a few examples of NVMe admin commands constructed
using the VFIO, NVMe, and Log modules (without depending on the UNVMe module).
The user can build more NVMe admin commands based on those examples.



System Requirements
===================

UNVMe depends on features provided by the VFIO module in the Linux kernel
(introduced since 3.6).  UNVMe code has been built and tested with CentOS 6 and 7
running on x86_64 CPU based systems.

UNVMe requires the following hardware and software support:

    VT-d    -   CPU must support VT-d (Virtualization Technology for Directed I/O).
                Check <http://ark.intel.com/> for Intel product specifications.

    VFIO    -   Linux kernel 3.6 or later compiled with the following configurations:

                    CONFIG_IOMMU_API=y
                    CONFIG_IOMMU_SUPPORT=y
                    CONFIG_INTEL_IOMMU=y
                    CONFIG_VFIO=m
                    CONFIG_VFIO_PCI=m
                    CONFIG_VFIO_IOMMU_TYPE1=m

                The boot command line must set "intel_iommu=on" argument.

                To verify the system correctly configured with VFIO support,
                check that /sys/kernel/iommu_groups directory is not empty but
                contains other subdirectories (i.e. group numbers).

                On CentOS 6, which comes with kernel version 2.6, the user must
                compile and boot a newer kernel that has the VFIO module.
                The user must also copy the header file from the kernel source
                directory include/uapi/linux/vfio.h to /usr/include/linux.



Build and Test
==============

To build and install, run:

    $ make install


Prior to using the UNVMe driver, the script test/unvme-setup needs to be
run once which will bind all (or a specified list of) NVMe devices in
the system to be used with the UNVMe driver.

    $ test/unvme-setup help


For usage, run:

    $ test/unvme-setup help

    Usage:
        unvme-setup                 # enable all NVMe devices for UNVMe
        unvme-setup [BB:DD.F]...    # enable specific NVMe devices for UNVMe
        unvme-setup list            # list all NVMe devices mapping info
        unvme-setup reset           # reset all NVMe devices to kernel driver


To run UNVMe basic test, invoke the script:

    $ test/unvme-test PCINAME       # PCINAME as 01:00.0



I/O Benchmark Tests
===================

To run fio benchmark tests against UNVMe:

    1) Compile the fio source code (available on https://github.com/axboe/fio).

    2) Edit Makefile.def and set FIO_DIR to the compiled fio source code.
       Setting FIO_DIR will enable ioengine/unvme_fio to be built.

    3) Recompile the UNVMe code to include fio engine code, run:
    
       $ make

       Note that the unvme_fio.c engine has been verified to work with the fio
       versions 2.7 through 2.14 (as fio source code is constantly changing).

    4) Launch the test script:
    
       $ test/unvme-benchmark PCINAME

       Note the benchmark test will, by default, run random read and write tests
       with queue count 1, 4, 8, 16 and queue depth of 1, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64.
       Each test will be run for 7 minutes which includes a 2-minute ramp time.
       These default settings can be overridden from the shell command line, e.g.:

       $ RAMPTIME=60 RUNTIME=120 QCOUNT="1 4" QDEPTH="4 8" test/unvme-benchmark 07:00.0

       If the specified PCINAME argument begins with /dev/nvme, the test will assume
       the SSD is bound to the kernel space driver and thus use the "libaio" engine.
       Otherwise, if the PCINAME matches the device format BB:DD:F, the test will assume
       the SSD is bound to UNVMe driver and thus will use the "ioengine/unvme_fio" engine.
       The benchmark results will be saved in test/out directory.

       For comparison, unvme-benchmark should be run on the same device binding to the
       kernel space driver as well as the user space UVNMe driver.  For example, run:

       $ test/unvme-setup
       $ test/unvme-benchmark 01:00.0
       $ test/unvme-setup reset
       $ test/unvme-benchmark /dev/nvme0n1



Programming Interfaces
======================

The UNVMe APIs are designed with application ease of use in mind.
As defined in unvme.h, the following functions are supported:

    unvme_open()    -   This function must be invoked first to establish a
                        connection to the specified PCI device (e.g. 07:00.0).
                        The qcount and qsize parameters provide the
                        application the ability to adjust its performance
                        based on the device characteristics.  The maximum
                        number of queues is limited by the device support.

    unvme_close()   -   Close a device connection.

    unvme_alloc()   -   Allocate an I/O memory buffer of a given size.

    unvme_free()    -   Free the allocated buffer.


    unvme_write()   -   Write the specified number of blocks (nlb) to the
                        device starting at logical block address (slba).
                        The buffer must be acquired from unvme_alloc()
                        specified in 512-byte offset granularity.  The qid
                        (range from 0 to qcount-1) may be used for thread
                        safety.  Each queue must only be accessed by a
                        single thread at any one time.

    unvme_read()    -   Read from the device (like unvme_write).


    unvme_awrite()  -   Send a write command to the device asynchronously
                        and return immediately.  The returned descriptor
                        may be used to poll for completion.

    unvme_aread()   -   Send an asynchronous read (like unvme_awrite).

    unvme_apoll()   -   Poll an asynchronous read/write for completion.


Note the default log filename is /dev/shm/unvme.log.

Commit message:

Mentioning the availability of user space filesystem UNFS.

README.md, after:

UNVMe - A User Space NVMe Driver
================================

UNVMe is a user space NVMe driver developed at Micron Technology.

The UNVMe code under the src directory contains four independent modules:

    VFIO    -   VFIO supported device and I/O memory wrapper functions
                (unvme_vfio.h unvme_vfio.c)

    NVMe    -   NVMe supported functions
                (unvme_nvme.h unvme_nvme.c)

    Log     -   Simple logging supported functions
                (unvme_log.h unvme_log.c)

    UNVMe   -   User Space application interface built on top of the above
                three modules (unvme.h unvme.c unvme_core.h unvme_core.c)


The test/nvme directory contains a few examples of NVMe admin commands constructed
using the VFIO, NVMe, and Log modules (without depending on the UNVMe module).
The user can build more NVMe admin commands based on those examples.



System Requirements
===================

UNVMe depends on features provided by the VFIO module in the Linux kernel
(introduced since 3.6).  UNVMe code has been built and tested with
CentOS 6 and 7 running on x86_64 CPU based systems.

UNVMe requires the following hardware and software support:

    VT-d    -   CPU must support VT-d (Virtualization Technology for Directed I/O).
                Check <http://ark.intel.com/> for Intel product specifications.

    VFIO    -   Linux kernel 3.6 or later compiled with the following configurations:

                    CONFIG_IOMMU_API=y
                    CONFIG_IOMMU_SUPPORT=y
                    CONFIG_INTEL_IOMMU=y
                    CONFIG_VFIO=m
                    CONFIG_VFIO_PCI=m
                    CONFIG_VFIO_IOMMU_TYPE1=m

                The boot command line must set "intel_iommu=on" argument.

                To verify the system correctly configured with VFIO support,
                check that /sys/kernel/iommu_groups directory is not empty but
                contains other subdirectories (i.e. group numbers).

                On CentOS 6, which comes with kernel version 2.6, the user
                must compile and boot a newer kernel that has the VFIO module.
                The user must also copy the header file from the kernel source
                directory include/uapi/linux/vfio.h to /usr/include/linux.


UNVMe requires root privilege and supports only one single process in
accessing a given NVMe device.



Build and Test
==============

To build and install, run:

    $ make install


Prior to using the UNVMe driver, the script test/unvme-setup needs to be
run once which will bind all (or a specified list of) NVMe devices in
the system to the UNVMe driver (instead of kernel space driver).

    $ test/unvme-setup help


For usage, run:

    $ test/unvme-setup help

    Usage:
        unvme-setup                 # enable all NVMe devices for UNVMe
        unvme-setup [BB:DD.F]...    # enable specific NVMe devices for UNVMe
        unvme-setup list            # list all NVMe devices binding info
        unvme-setup reset           # reset all NVMe devices to system driver


To run UNVMe basic test, invoke the script:

    $ test/unvme-test PCINAME       # PCINAME as 01:00.0



I/O Benchmark Tests
===================

To run fio benchmark tests against UNVMe:

    1) Compile the fio source code (available on https://github.com/axboe/fio).

    2) Edit Makefile.def and set FIO_DIR to the compiled fio source code.
       Setting FIO_DIR will enable ioengine/unvme_fio to be built.

    3) Recompile the UNVMe code to include fio engine code, run:
    
       $ make

       Note that the unvme_fio.c engine has been verified to work with the fio
       versions 2.7 through 2.14 (as fio source code is constantly changing).

    4) Launch the test script:
    
       $ test/unvme-benchmark DEVICE_NAME

       Note the benchmark test will, by default, run random read and write tests
       with queue count 1, 4, 8, 16 and queue depth of 1, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64.
       Each test will be run for 7 minutes which includes a 2-minute ramp time.
       These default settings can be overridden from the shell command line, e.g.:

       $ RAMPTIME=60 RUNTIME=120 QCOUNT="1 4" QDEPTH="4 8" test/unvme-benchmark 07:00.0

       If the specified DEVICE_NAME argument begins with /dev/nvme, the test
       will assume the NVMe device is bound to the kernel space driver and
       thus use the "libaio" engine.  Otherwise, if the DEVICE_NAME matches
       the format BB:DD:F, the test will assume the device is bound to UNVMe
       driver and thus will use the "ioengine/unvme_fio" engine.
       The benchmark results will be saved in test/out directory.

       For comparison, unvme-benchmark should be run on the same device binding
       to the kernel space driver as well as the user space UVNMe driver.
       For example, run:

       $ test/unvme-setup
       $ test/unvme-benchmark 01:00.0
       $ test/unvme-setup reset
       $ test/unvme-benchmark /dev/nvme0n1



Programming Interfaces
======================

The UNVMe APIs are designed with application ease of use in mind.
As defined in unvme.h, the following functions are supported:

    unvme_open()    -   This function must be invoked first to establish a
                        connection to the specified PCI device (e.g. 07:00.0).
                        The qcount and qsize parameters provide the
                        application the ability to adjust its performance
                        based on the device characteristics.  The maximum
                        number of queues is limited by the device support.

    unvme_close()   -   Close a device connection.

    unvme_alloc()   -   Allocate an I/O memory buffer of a given size.

    unvme_free()    -   Free the allocated buffer.


    unvme_write()   -   Write the specified number of blocks (nlb) to the
                        device starting at logical block address (slba).
                        The buffer must be acquired from unvme_alloc()
                        specified in 512-byte offset granularity.  The qid
                        (range from 0 to qcount-1) may be used for thread
                        safety.  Each queue must only be accessed by a
                        single thread at any one time.

    unvme_read()    -   Read from the device (like unvme_write).


    unvme_awrite()  -   Send a write command to the device asynchronously
                        and return immediately.  The returned descriptor
                        may be used to poll for completion.

    unvme_aread()   -   Send an asynchronous read (like unvme_awrite).

    unvme_apoll()   -   Poll an asynchronous read/write for completion.


Note the default log filename is /dev/shm/unvme.log.

A user space filesystem, namely UNFS, has also been developed at Micron
to work with UNVMe driver.  Such available filesystem enables major
applications such as MongoDB to be ported to work with UNVMe driver.
See https://github.com/MicronSSD/unfs.git for details.
